DAOS-18186 doc: document fabric configuration details (#18660)
daos-stack/daos: docs/admin/fabrics.md

  DAOS servers (through the `dmg` command and the DAOS management API), and
  from the `daos_agent` daemon on the DAOS client nodes to all DAOS servers
  (but not to other clients).

* Application I/O in the DAOS _data plane_.
  The DAOS data plane uses the DAOS Collective and RPC Transport (CaRT) layer
  for communication between DAOS clients and DAOS servers.
  CaRT relies on the [Mercury](https://mercury-hpc.github.io/user/overview/)
  RPC framework, which provides RDMA transfer capabilities if the underlying
  high performance fabric supports it.

When designing a DAOS solution, one question that needs to be decided
early on is if the control plane traffic will be using the same physical
network as the data plane (for example, and IP-over-IB interface on the
InfiniBand NIC in an InfiniBand network), or if the control plane will use
a separate physical network (like an administrative Ethernet LAN).

* For example, if there is a reliable 25GbE management LAN over which
  all DAOS servers, DAOS clients and DAOS admin nodes can communicate,
  then it is possible to use that network for the control plane.

> * On the other hand, if the management LAN of the DAOS servers is isolated

Reviewer: Should we continue to use `network` here instead on `LAN`?

  from the client nodes' management LAN (which is a best practice to
  protect the server-side management interfaces), then the control plane
  must use TCP over the data plane network to guarantee that the DAOS
  servers, clients and admin nodes can communicate with each other.

> This is configured in the `daos_server.yml`, `daos_agent.yml` and

Reviewer: It may help to be a bit more specific here:
```suggestion
The control plane network is configured in the `daos_server.yml`, `daos_agent.yml` and
```

> `daos_contol.yml` files, by using the IP addresses (or IP names) of

Reviewer 2: IP names? do you mean hostnames?

Author: in DNS terms it would be the "domain name" (or the PTR record that gets returned by a reverse lookup of the IP address". i don't like the term hostname because what the "hostname" command returns does not have to have anything to do with the domain name(s) associated witha node's IP address(es). if there's a better term than "IP name", happy to use that...

Author: renamed IP name to hostname

> `daos_contol.yml` files, by using the IP addresses (or IP names) of

Reviewer 3: typo
```suggestion
`daos_control.yml` files, by using the IP addresses (or IP names) of
```

either then nodes' management LAN interface or an IP-over-IB interface
of their high-speed NICs in the control plane configuration sections.
The settings in these three configuration files must be consistent.

For example, for a cluster of 8 DAOS servers where nodes 1, 4 and 8 are

> defined as management service replicas, to use the IP-over-IB interfaces:

Reviewer: With something similar to the following, we could remove lines 70-72:
```suggestion
Given an 8-node cluster of nodes n[0001-0008], where:
- nodes n[0001,0004,0008] are defined as management service replicas
- and the '-ibs1' node name suffix represents and IP-over-IB interface
The following example would designate a control plane network using
the IP-over-IB interface:
```

```yaml
# daos_agent.yml
mgmt_svc_replicas:
- n0001-ibs1
- n0004-ibs1
- n0008-ibs1

# daos_agent.yml
access_points:
- n0001-ibs1
- n0004-ibs1
- n0008-ibs1

> #daos_control.yml

Reviewer: For consistency:
```suggestion
# daos_control.yml
```

hostlist:
- n0001-ibs1
- n0002-ibs1
- n0003-ibs1
- n0004-ibs1
- n0005-ibs1
- n0006-ibs1
- n0007-ibs1
- n0008-ibs1
```

> This assumes that IP names for the IP-over-IB interfaces of the first

Reviewer: If we keep this section:
```suggestion
The example above assumes that IP names for the IP-over-IB interfaces of the first
```

    binds to 0.0.0.0, so it listens on all network interfaces.
    To limit the control plane to a specific interface, the `control_iface:`
    setting in the `daos_server.yml` configuration file can be used.

To use the management LAN interface, replace the above IP names with the
IP names of the management LAN interfaces (typically identical to the hostname).

The rest of this document assumes that the control plane is using
IP-over-IB over the data plane's high-speed NICs,
and focuses on data plane configuration.

Please refer to
[Partition isolation for control plane traffic over InfiniBand)](ib-pkey.md)
for important control plane configuration information regarding
InfiniBand networks.

## Mercury installation

The CaRT layer that is used by the DAOS _data plane_ is part of the main
DAOS RPM packages. CaRT uses the Mercury RPC framework, which is provided
as separate RPMs within the DAOS packages directory.
Mercury's default backend plugin is OFI
[libfabric](https://ofiwg.github.io/libfabric/),
which is the recommended Mercury backend for all fabrics
except NVIDIA based InfiniBand and RoCE Ethernet fabrics.
Mercuy also has a UCF [UCX](https://openucx.org/) backend,

> which is the recommended Mercury backend for NVIDIA based fabrics.

Reviewer: This might flow a bit better:
```suggestion
For RoCE Ethernet and NVIDIA based fabrics the Mercuy UCF
[UCX](https://openucx.org/) backend is the recommended plugin.
```

## NIC firmware update

The adapter firmware on the Network Interface Cards (NICs) of the high speed
fabric is a critical component of any parallel storage system,
and DAOS is no exception.
Backlevel firmware or inconsistent firmware levels across nodes in the
fabric can cause operational issues that are hard to debug and resolve.
When installing the host software stack for the fabric, adapter firmware
levels should always be checked and updated to the correct level.
Refer to the respective fabric's documentation for details.

## Provider selection and configuration

On DAOS _servers_, the fabric provider is configured in the `daos_server.yml`
configuration file. Details for each supported fabric are given below.

The `daos_server network scan` command displays all network interfaces that
are recognized on a DAOS server for the provider that is set in the
`daos_server.yml` configuration file.
To list **all** providers that are recognized for each of the server's
network interfaces, add the `--ignore-config` option. If an expected provider
is missing in the `daos_server network scan --ignore-config` output,
check if all the host software stack components are installed.

> 

Reviewer 2: minor thing, but when reading about commands to use i find it helpful when a sample output is provided to know what to expect

Author: added examples

DAOS clients **do** need to have the correct Mercury backend and fabric
host stack software installed to be able to communicate with the servers.
The `daos-agent net-scan` command displays all fabric providers that are
recognized on the DAOS client for each of its network interfaces.
If an expected provider is missing in the `daos_agent net-scan` output,
check if all the host software stack components are installed.

Unless they are also DAOS servers or DAOS clients, DAOS _admin nodes_
only use the control plane, so fabric provider configuration
does not apply to the admin node role.

### Generic TCP Fabrics with libfabric TCP

DAOS should run over any standard TCP/IP network, using the libfabric
`ofi+tcp` provider. This provider does **not** support RDMA transfers,
and the operating system's TCP stack is used which typically implies
higher CPU utilization, higher latency, and lower bandwidth than
 the other providers. The TCP provider should only be used on fabrics
where none of the other fabric providers can be used.

The required configuration in the `daos_server.yml` file is minimal:

```yaml
provider: ofi+tcp

engines:
-
  fabric_iface: eth4
-

>   fabric_iface: eth5

Reviewer 2: this example using 2 interfaces also requires proper dual-rail sysctl setup in order to work. There was a section somewhere in admin guide on that, might be handy to link it here

Author: added a section with reference to the predeployment checklist

```

To achieve good performance over TCP, the operating system's TCP/IP stack
has to be tuned for performance. To benefit from the performance of modern
fabrics like 400Gbps Ethernet, larger settings than the OS defaults are
often needed for many of the networking settings. In particular,
the TCP buffer sizes in `net.ipv4` (and the corresponding
settings in `net.core`) as well as other performance-related
TCP settings should be reviewed and tuned. The optimized settings need to be
made persistent, for example through a configuration file in `/etc/sysctl.d/`.

In addition to `sysctl` tuning, the **MTU size** of all network interfaces
in the fabric should be set to the largest supported value.
On native Ethernet fabrics, this is typically MTU=9000.
The MTU can be set in network interface configuration files like
`/etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/ifcfg-eth0`
or an equivalent `nmcli` configuration.

### RoCE on NVIDIA Ethernet with DOCA-OFED and UCX

While DAOS runs on any TCP network with the `ofi+tcp` provider,

> zAOS also supports RDMA over Converged Ethernet (RoCE)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DAOS also supports RDMA over Converged Ethernet (RoCE)
```

Ethernet, make sure that the `mst`  package is installed (it should
be part of the DOCA-OFED installation), and run the following steps
to determine the device name of the port to be changed,
change the link type, and reboot the node to make the change effective.
For example, with ConnectX-7 adapters (MT4129):

```bash
nmcli conn delete ib0
mst start
mst status # note the device type of the adapter to use
DEV="mt4129_pciconf0"
mlxconfig -d /dev/mst/$DEV query | grep LINK_TYPE
echo "y" | mlxconfig -d /dev/mst/$DEV set LINK_TYPE_P1=2

shutdown -r now

DEV="mt4129_pciconf0"
mlxconfig -d /dev/mst/$DEV query | grep LINK_TYPE
```

The recommendations in the "TCP" section regarding OS-level tuning of the
TCP stack (`sysctl` settings, MTU size) are also beneficial for a RoCE setup.
There will likely be other traffic on the high-speed Ethernet interfaces
that will benefit from this tuning, even if the RoCE transport itself does
not need this.

Example of the network-related configuration settings for RoCE
in the `daos_server.yml` file:

```yaml
provider: ucx+dc_x

engines:
-
  fabric_iface: ens1np0

  env_vars:
  - UCX_SOCKADDR_TLS_PRIORITY=rdmacm

>   - UCX_IB_FORK_INIT=n

Reviewer 3: Might be good to document why these are needed and what they do. If these are used with any UCX configuration, would it be good for the control plane to set these by default?

Author: agreed, but missed the boat to make this the defaults in 2.8.0

Reviewer 3: Gotcha. Is there a ticket to take care of this for 2.8.1/3.0? Seems like pretty low-hanging fruit.

-
  fabric_iface: enP1s3np0

  env_vars:
  - UCX_SOCKADDR_TLS_PRIORITY=rdmacm
  - UCX_IB_FORK_INIT=n
```

Depending on the size of the fabric, other settings like the CaRT timeout
(set with `crt_timeout:` in the global section of the `daos_server.yml` file)
and/or the SWIM timeout settings (set as `SWIM_*` environment variables
within the `env_vars:` section of both engines) may also need to be adjusted.

> But these settings depend on the fabric details, and there is no general

Reviewer 2: not just fabric details, but also cluster size etc...

Author: yes, size would be one important detail of the fabric ;-) can call it out explicitly.

recommendation to deviate from the defaults.

### NVIDIA InfiniBand with DOCA-OFED and UCX

The recommended provider for InfiniBand fabrics is `ucx+dc_x`,
and a current DOCA-OFED level has to be installed on all hosts.
UCX with the DC transport does support RDMA, and it does not suffer
from the scalability limitations of the libfabric `ofi+verbs`

> provider (which is not recommended for DAOS on InfiniBand fabrics).

Reviewer 2: this reads a bit strange, not sure why we mention verbs here at all. there are other providers like ucx+tcp that we also dont recommend, but i think recommending ucx+dc_x covers it:)

Omni-Path CN5000 fabrics with TCP, even with the increased MTU size.

Cornelis has implemented a verbs API over CN5000, and the `ofi+verbs`
provider is the recommended provider for DAOS on CN5000.
To achieve the best performance, it is recommended to enable the Cornelis
_HFI service_ (previously called _Bulk Transfer Service (BTS)_)
in the Omni-Path SuperNIC driver: 

```
cat /sys/module/hfi1/parameters/use_bulksvc
echo "options hfi1 use_bulksvc=Y" >> /etc/modprobe.d/hfi1.conf

dracut –f
reboot

cat /sys/module/hfi1/parameters/use_bulksvc
```

Before enabling the HFI service, querying the `use_bulksvc` driver parameter
will return `N`. When the service is enabled, it should return `Y`.
This needs to be done on each host in the CN5000 fabric.

Example of the network-related configuration settings for Omni-Path
CN5000 with the `ofi+verbs` API in the `daos_server.yml` file:

```yaml
provider: ofi+verbs

engines:
-
  fabric_iface: ibs3d1
-
  fabric_iface: ibs6d1
```

Depending on the size of the fabric, other settings like the CaRT timeout
(set with `crt_timeout:` in the global section of the `daos_server.yml` file)

> and/or the SWIM timeout settings (set as `SWIM_*` environment variables

Reviewer 3: Do we have a list of these environment variables somewhere?

Author: we have an incomplete list, and we do not vhave ery clear guidance on what values to set them to. 

i'd prefer to keep the wording vague here for now, and update the docs later as we gain more clarity on how such settings should be changed depending on the type and size of the fabric.
